---
redirect_from: [/posts/2019-05-27-ormolu.html]
title: "Ormolu:  Format Haskell code like never before"
shortTitle: "Ormolu: a new Haskell formatter"
author: Mark Karpov
tags: [haskell]
---

If we think of the average Haskeller, who do we see? A poor, broken person.
Tired head falls into the open palms, sobbing, deprived of the basic human
right for automated source code formatting.

Is it at all conceivable that so many attempts were made and none quite
succeeded? The design space is surprisingly large. Perhaps the sweet spot
for large projects with several contributors hasn't been found yet.

I'd like to announce a new project called [Ormolu][ormolu]. It's still
vaporware, but that's just a bug we're a long way into fixing, and I want to
convince you that the principles are sound.

## Principles

Ormolu is a formatter that follows a few simple ideas that make it quite
unlike other similar projects in the Haskell land. I'm going to explain them
now.

What are code formatters good for? Normalizing what does not impact
readability and therefore need not be under the programmer's control. But
use of whitespace _does_ impact readability, and therefore should be under
at least partial control of the programmer. In other words, there is no gain
in tolerating 5 different type signature styles, when there is gain in
letting the programmer decide whether some if-then-else should be single
line or multiline.

In Ormolu, the layout of the input influences the layout of the output. This
means that the choices between single line/multiline layouts in each
particular situation are made by the author of the original source code, not
by an algorithm. While giving more precise control to the user, as a bonus
we also get a simpler and faster implementation.

Both [Hindent][hindent] and [Brittany][brittany] try to make their own
decisions about use of whitespace. While Hindent's decisions are simpler
than Brittany's, great care needs to be taken in the implementation to avoid
[exponential blowups][exp-blowups] when formatting deeply nested
expressions. On the other hand Brittany tries hard to avoid those, at the
cost of more complex data structures.

Code formatters are also good to take away some of the tedium of writing
code in the first place. With Ormolu, if you decide that a particular
case-expression or type signature should be multiline, you don't have to
painstakingly write out each line properly indented. Just introduce a line
break anywhere _at least once_ and Ormolu will do the rest.

Let's see an example of Ormolu's approach. The input:

```haskell
-- | Foo performs foo and sometimes bar.

foo :: Thoroughness
  -> Int -> Int
foo t x = if x > 20
    then case t of
           Thorough -> x + 50
           Somewhat -> x + 20
           NotAtAll -> 0
    else 10 + 1
```

Results in the following formatted code:

```haskell
-- | Foo performs foo and sometimes bar.
foo
  :: Thoroughness
  -> Int
  -> Int
foo t x =
  if x > 20
  then
    case t of
      Thorough -> x + 50
      Somewhat -> x + 20
      NotAtAll -> 0
  else 10 + 1
```

The fact that the signature of `foo` occupies two lines in the original
source code causes the multiline version of the type signature to be used in
the formatted version. The same principle applies to the body of `foo`. Note
the difference between formatting of `then` and `else` clauses: `then` is
multiline and `else` is single line.

Other features that are worth mentioning:

- Idempotency: formatting already formatted code is a no-op. This is an
  important property for any code formatter to have, which still holds under
  our multiline-in-multiline-out policy, even if the formatting for a given
  parse tree is not unique.

- The project aims to implement one “true” formatting style which admits no
  configuration. Similarly to what's described in [the blog post about
  Hindent 5][hident5-post], we concluded that if formatting is done
  automatically, it's better to embrace one style and avoid stylistic
  fragmentation. This way everyone who uses Ormolu will be automatically on
  the same page.

- The formatting style aims to result in minimal diffs while still remaining
  close to conventional Haskell formatting. Certain formatting practices,
  like vertically aligning the bodies of let-bindings or allowing the length
  of a type or variable name to influence indentation level lead to diff
  amplification. Therefore, we try to avoid that.

## Why Ormolu?

There are a few solutions for formatting Haskell source code, why would this
project be more successful?

- Ormolu uses GHC's own parser to avoid parsing problems caused by
  [`haskell-src-exts`][haskell-src-exts]. Many similar projects suffer from
  the fact that they don't use the same parser that GHC does. Like Brittany,
  we are using the parser from the [`ghc`][ghc] package and therefore work
  with the same AST that GHC uses.

- The code of the formatter is written so that it's easy to modify and
  maintain. Roughly, it means that the project follows the path of
  [Hindent][hindent] and is very much about printing the AST in a particular
  way. So far I think the goal is met and the code base is hacking-friendly.

- There is a good testing scheme in place that allows us to grow the
  collection of examples easily. This will keep the project well-tested and
  robust to the point that it can be used in large projects without exposing
  unfortunate, disappointing bugs here and there.

- It is an open project that anyone is free to fork and it is actively
  maintained by a large commercial contributor, that is, Tweag. This makes
  the odds very high that it'll be maintained in the future and bugs will be
  fixed.

## Want it sooner? You can help!

Right now some parts of the AST are implemented fully, such as data type
definitions, module export lists, and a few others. Most importantly,
handling of comments is dealt with implicitly by the rendering combinators,
allowing us to focus on rendering the AST nodes only.

But the GHC AST is huge. This is why contributions are welcome. The printing
framework and the approach to testing that we use makes it very easy to
implement the rendering of the missing parts of AST. So right now it's just
a matter of time before we have a fully featured formatter for Haskell code.

Let's do it iteratively: spend an evening and implement rendering of a
little bit of Haskell syntax, throw in a few files in the test suite and
boom, we're a bit closer. One can pick up something really simple, such as
e.g. role annotations. It takes 1 hour or so, but a whole new type of
declarations will be supported! Lots of fun.

What is more, we're taking Ormolu to [ZuriHac][zurihac], where everyone will
be able to help developing the project. So come and contribute to a tool
that you'll be able to use proudly at your daily job. Or indeed, in the
intimacy of a late evening. As a little secret. Just between you and your
source code.

[ormolu]: https://github.com/tweag/ormolu
[hident5-post]: https://chrisdone.com/posts/hindent-5
[stylish-haskell]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/stylish-haskell
[haskell-src-exts]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/haskell-src-exts
[ghc]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc
[hindent]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/hindent
[brittany]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/brittany
[zurihac]: https://zfoh.ch/zurihac2019/
[exp-blowups]: https://github.com/chrisdone/hindent/issues/531
