---
title: "Nix Flakes, Part 1: An introduction and tutorial"
shortTitle: "Nix Flakes (1): Introduction"
author: Eelco Dolstra
tags: [nix]
description: "An introduction to Nix flakes and a tutorial on how to use them."
---

This is the first in a series of blog posts intended to provide a
gentle introduction to
[_flakes_](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49), a new Nix feature
that improves reproducibility, composability and usability in the Nix
ecosystem. This blog post describes why flakes were introduced, and
give a short tutorial on how to use them.

Flakes were developed at Tweag and funded by Target Corporation and
Tweag.

## What problems do flakes solve?

Once upon a time, Nix pioneered reproducible builds: it tries hard to
ensure that two builds of the same derivation graph produce an
identical result. Unfortunately, the evaluation of Nix files into such
a derivation graph isn't nearly as reproducible, despite the language
being nominally purely functional.

For example, Nix files can access arbitrary files (such as
`~/.config/nixpkgs/config.nix`), environment variables, Git
repositories, files in the Nix search path (`$NIX_PATH`), command-line
arguments (`--arg`) and the system type (`builtins.currentSystem`). In
other words, _evaluation isn't as hermetic as it could be_. In practice, ensuring reproducible evaluation of things like NixOS system configurations requires special care.

Furthermore, there is no _standard way to compose Nix-based
projects_. It's rare that everything you need is in Nixpkgs; consider
for instance projects that use Nix as a build tool, or NixOS system
configurations. Typical ways to compose Nix files are to rely on the
Nix search path (e.g. `import <nixpkgs>`) or to use `fetchGit` or
`fetchTarball`. The former has poor reproducibility, while the latter
provides a bad user experience because of the need to manually update
Git hashes to update dependencies.

There is also no easy way to _deliver_ Nix-based projects to
users. Nix has a "channel" mechanism (essentially a tarball containing
Nix files), but it's not easy to create channels and they are not
composable. Finally, Nix-based projects lack a standardized structure.
There are some conventions (e.g. `shell.nix` or `release.nix`) but
they don't cover many common use cases; for instance, there is no
way to discover the NixOS modules provided by a repository.

Flakes are a solution to these problems. A flake is simply a source
tree (such as a Git repository) containing a file named `flake.nix`
that provides a standardized interface to Nix artifacts such as
packages or NixOS modules. Flakes can have dependencies on other
flakes, with a "lock file" pinning those dependencies to exact
revisions to ensure reproducible evaluation.

The flake file format and semantics are described in a [NixOS
RFC](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49), which is currently the
best reference on flakes.

## Trying out flakes

Flakes are currently implemented in [an experimental branch of
Nix](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/tree/flakes). If you want to play
with flakes, you can get this version of Nix from Nixpkgs:

```console
$ nix-shell -I nixpkgs=channel:nixos-20.03 -p nixFlakes
```

Since flakes are an experimental feature, you also need to add the
following line to `~/.config/nix/nix.conf`:

```
experimental-features = nix-command flakes
```

or pass the flag `--experimental-features 'nix-command flakes'`
whenever you call the `nix` command.

## Using flakes

To see flakes in action, let's start
with a simple Unix package named `dwarffs` (a FUSE filesystem that
automatically fetches debug symbols from the Internet). It lives in a
GitHub repository at `https://github.com/edolstra/dwarffs`; it is a
flake because it contains a file named
[`flake.nix`](https://github.com/edolstra/dwarffs/blob/master/flake.nix). We
will look at the contents of this file later, but in short, it tells
Nix what the flake provides (such as Nix packages, NixOS modules or CI
tests).

The following command fetches the `dwarffs` Git repository, builds its
_default package_ and runs it.

```console
$ nix shell github:edolstra/dwarffs -c dwarffs --version
dwarffs 0.1.20200406.cd7955a
```

The command above isn't very _reproducible_: it fetches the most
recent version of `dwarffs`, which could change over time. But it's
easy to ask Nix to build a specific revision:

```console
$ nix shell github:edolstra/dwarffs/cd7955af31698c571c30b7a0f78e59fd624d0229 ...
```

Nix tries very hard to ensure that the result of building a flake from
such a URL is always the same. This requires it to restrict a number
of things that Nix projects could previously do. For example, the
`dwarffs` project requires a number of dependencies (such as a C++
compiler) that it gets from the Nix Packages collection (Nixpkgs). In
the past, you might use the `NIX_PATH` environment variable to allow
your project to find Nixpkgs. In the world of flakes, this is no
longer allowed: flakes have to declare their dependencies explicitly,
and these dependencies have to be _locked_ to specific revisions.

In order to do so, `dwarffs`'s `flake.nix` file declares an explicit
dependency on Nixpkgs, which is also a
[flake](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/flake.nix).
We can see the dependencies of a flake as follows:

```console
$ nix flake list-inputs github:edolstra/dwarffs
github:edolstra/dwarffs/d11b181af08bfda367ea5cf7fad103652dc0409f
├───nix: github:NixOS/nix/3aaceeb7e2d3fb8a07a1aa5a21df1dca6bbaa0ef
│   └───nixpkgs: github:NixOS/nixpkgs/b88ff468e9850410070d4e0ccd68c7011f15b2be
└───nixpkgs: github:NixOS/nixpkgs/b88ff468e9850410070d4e0ccd68c7011f15b2be
```

So the `dwarffs` flake depends on a _specific_ version of the
`nixpkgs` flake (as well as the `nix` flake). As a result, building
`dwarffs` will always produce the same result. We didn't specify this
version in `dwarffs`'s `flake.nix`. Instead, it's recorded in a _lock
file_ named
[flake.lock](https://github.com/edolstra/dwarffs/blob/master/flake.nix)
that is generated automatically by Nix and committed to the `dwarffs`
repository.

## Flake outputs

Another goal of flakes is to provide a standard structure for
discoverability within Nix-based projects. Flakes can provide
arbitrary Nix values, such as packages, NixOS modules or library
functions. These are called its _outputs_. We can see the outputs of a
flake as follows:

```console
$ nix flake show github:edolstra/dwarffs
github:edolstra/dwarffs/d11b181af08bfda367ea5cf7fad103652dc0409f
├───checks
│   ├───aarch64-linux
│   │   └───build: derivation 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
│   ├───i686-linux
│   │   └───build: derivation 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
│   └───x86_64-linux
│       └───build: derivation 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
├───defaultPackage
│   ├───aarch64-linux: package 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
│   ├───i686-linux: package 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
│   └───x86_64-linux: package 'dwarffs-0.1.20200409'
├───nixosModules
│   └───dwarffs: NixOS module
└───overlay: Nixpkgs overlay
```

While a flake can have arbitrary outputs, some of them, if they exist,
have a special meaning to certain Nix commands and therefore must have
a specific type. For example, the output `defaultPackage.<system>`
must be a derivation; it's what `nix build` and `nix shell` will build
by default unless you specify another output. The `nix` CLI allows you to
specify another output through a syntax reminiscent of URL fragments:

```console
$ nix build github:edolstra/dwarffs#checks.aarch64-linux.build
```

By the way, the standard `checks` output specifies a set of
derivations to be built by a continuous integration system such as
Hydra. Because flake evaluation is hermetic and the lock file locks
all dependencies, it's guaranteed that the `nix build` command above
will evaluate to the same result as the one in the CI system.

## The flake registry

Flake locations are specified using a URL-like syntax such as
`github:edolstra/dwarffs` or
`git+https://github.com/NixOS/patchelf`. But because such URLs would
be rather verbose if you had to type them all the time on the command
line, there also is a [flake
registry](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NixOS/flake-registry/master/flake-registry.json)
that maps symbolic identifiers such as `nixpkgs` to actual locations
like `https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs`. So the following are (by
default) equivalent:

```console
$ nix shell nixpkgs#cowsay -c cowsay Hi!
$ nix shell github:NixOS/nixpkgs#cowsay -c cowsay Hi!
```

It's possible to override the registry locally. For example, you can
override the `nixpkgs` flake to your own Nixpkgs tree:

```console
$ nix registry add nixpkgs ~/my-nixpkgs
```

or pin it to a specific revision:

```console
$ nix registry add nixpkgs github:NixOS/nixpkgs/5272327b81ed355bbed5659b8d303cf2979b6953
```

## Writing your first flake

Unlike Nix channels, creating a flake is pretty simple: you just add a
`flake.nix` and possibly a `flake.lock` to your project's repository. As
an example, suppose we want to create our very own Hello World and
distribute it as a flake. Let's create this project first:

```console
$ git init hello
$ cd hello
$ echo 'int main() { printf("Hello World"); }' > hello.c
$ git add hello.c
```

To turn this Git repository into a flake, we add a file named
`flake.nix` at the root of the repository with the following contents:

```nix
{
  description = "A flake for building Hello World";

  inputs.nixpkgs.url = github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-20.03;

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs }: {

    defaultPackage.x86_64-linux =
      # Notice the reference to nixpkgs here.
      with import nixpkgs { system = "x86_64-linux"; };
      stdenv.mkDerivation {
        name = "hello";
        src = self;
        buildPhase = "gcc -o hello ./hello.c";
        installPhase = "mkdir -p $out/bin; install -t $out/bin hello";
      };

  };
}
```

The command `nix flake init` creates a basic `flake.nix` for you.

Note that any file that is not tracked by Git is invisible during Nix
evaluation, in order to ensure hermetic evaluation. Thus, you need to
make `flake.nix` visible to Git:

```console
$ git add flake.nix
```

Let's see if it builds!

```console
$ nix build
warning: creating lock file '/home/eelco/Dev/hello/flake.lock'
warning: Git tree '/home/eelco/Dev/hello' is dirty

$ ./result/bin/hello
Hello World
```

or equivalently:

```console
$ nix shell -c hello
Hello World
```

It's also possible to get an interactive development environment in
which all the dependencies (like GCC) and shell variables and
functions from the derivation are in scope:

```console
$ nix dev-shell
$ eval "$buildPhase"
$ ./hello
Hello World
```

So what does all that stuff in `flake.nix` mean?

- The `description` attribute is a one-line description shown by `nix flake info`.

- The `inputs` attribute specifies other flakes that this flake
  depends on. These are fetched by Nix and passed as arguments to the
  `outputs` function.

- The `outputs` attribute is the heart of the flake: it's a function
  that produces an attribute set. The function arguments are the
  flakes specified in `inputs`.

  The `self` argument denotes _this_ flake. Its primarily useful for
  referring to the source of the flake (as in `src = self;`) or to
  other outputs (e.g. `self.defaultPackage.x86_64-linux`).

- The attributes produced by `outputs` are arbitrary values, except
  that (as we saw above) there are some standard outputs such as
  `defaultPackage.${system}`.

- Every flake has some metadata, such as `self.lastModifiedDate`,
  which is used to generate a version string like `hello-20191015`.

You may have noticed that the dependency specification
`github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-20.03` is imprecise: it says that we want
to use the `nixos-20.03` branch of Nixpkgs, but doesn't say which Git
revision. This seems bad for reproducibility. However, when we ran
`nix build`, Nix automatically generated a lock file that precisely
states which revision of `nixpkgs` to use:

```console
$ cat flake.lock
{
  "nodes": {
    "nixpkgs": {
      "info": {
        "lastModified": 1587398327,
        "narHash": "sha256-mEKkeLgUrzAsdEaJ/1wdvYn0YZBAKEG3AN21koD2AgU="
      },
      "locked": {
        "owner": "NixOS",
        "repo": "nixpkgs",
        "rev": "5272327b81ed355bbed5659b8d303cf2979b6953",
        "type": "github"
      },
      "original": {
        "owner": "NixOS",
        "ref": "nixos-20.03",
        "repo": "nixpkgs",
        "type": "github"
      }
    },
    "root": {
      "inputs": {
        "nixpkgs": "nixpkgs"
      }
    }
  },
  "root": "root",
  "version": 5
}
```

Any subsequent build of this flake will use the version of `nixpkgs`
recorded in the lock file. If you add new inputs to `flake.nix`, when
you run any command such as `nix build`, Nix will automatically add
corresponding locks to `flake.lock`. However, it won't replace
existing locks. If you want to update a locked input to the latest
version, you need to ask for it:

```console
$ nix flake update --update-input nixpkgs
$ nix build
```

To wrap things up, we can now commit our project and push it to
GitHub, after making sure that everything is in order:

```console
$ nix flake check
$ git commit -a -m 'Initial version'
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:edolstra/hello.git
$ git push -u origin master
```

Other users can then use this flake:

```console
$ nix shell github:edolstra/hello -c hello
```

## Next steps

In the next blog post, we'll talk about typical uses of flakes, such
as managing NixOS system configurations, distributing Nixpkgs overlays
and NixOS modules, and CI integration.
