---
title: "Daily ICFP: Day 0"
author: Noon van der Silk, Richard Eisenberg
tags: [icfp, haskell]
description: "Notes from the first day of ICFP"
---

# Daily ICFP

Several Tweagers all agreed to gather notes here about our
[ICFP](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/) (International Conference on Functional
Programming) experiences. We plan to publish these notes every evening.

## Day 0 - Sunday

These notes follow Noon and Richards ICFP day, roughly in order.

**Noon**

- This is my first day ever at ICFP! I'm just trying to get the hang of
  the platform, the topics, what background knowledge I'm expected to have, and
  how things are presented.

**Noon** &mdash; [Higher-order Programming with Effects and Handlers](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hope-2021-papers/8/Higher-order-Programming-with-Effects-and-Handlers-with-First-Class-Functions) by Jonathan Immanuel Brachthäuser

- First talk I was able to make it to (I slept in...)
- Was still waking up when I started watching it, so missed a few of the motivations and key concepts.
- Based on [Effekt](https://effekt-lang.org/) (not [Effekt](https://www.effekt.dk/)).
- Seemed to hinge on function as "second-class" citizens, but I didn't quite capture what this meant or what was important
  about it.
- There was a comment that "currying is the enemy of effectful systems", but I didn't understand this
  and unfortunately my internet disconnected precisely at the moment this question was being answered!

**Noon** &mdash; [Computational and Contextual Program Differences](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hope-2021-papers/12/Computational-and-Contextual-Program-Differences-Reasoning-About-Non-equivalent-Effe) by Francesco Gavazzo

- I hadn't intended to attend this talk, but got convinced by accidentally watching the start!
- Was excited about how to think about program differences and it's relationships to my old love, AI.
- To start with they show you can think about differences as a single number.
- Then, the argument is that maybe it's nice to have "higher-order" differences, to compare, say,
  richer programs.
- In the end, this framework can be used to compute a (numeric?) difference between two programs,
  along with (I think?) a notion of derivatives.
- They show how this composes nicely and give some examples, one that I somewhat followed was
  the distribution monad (i.e. comparing programs that use probability distributions)
- There was an argument this is useful for effectful programs (but I didn't totally follow this).
- Overall it seemed quite interesting!
- I was left wondering how it would relate back to program optimisation, and more generally
  more examples of where it would be useful; i.e. could you use it for program synthesis? I.e.
  here are two programs that are quite different; let me make an automatic change to get them
  to be closer together!

**Noon** &mdash; Speed Networking

- Chatted to a few nice people;
- Comisserated with on person over not understanding some parts of earlier talks;
- Forgot I manually muted my microphone and lamented that there was no way to see this on the platform.

**Noon** &mdash; [Functional Machine
Calculus](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hope-2021-papers/2/The-Functional-Machine-Calculus) by Willem Heijltjes

- Quite enjoyed the presentation.
- Didn't quite comprehend the motivation, but I enjoyed the talk!

**Richard**

- Attended TyDe [talk on
  Chameleon](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/TyDe-2021/6/Interactive-Haskell-Type-Inference-Exploration-Extended-Abstract-), a project by Shuai Fu and his advisors Tim
  Dwyer and Peter Stuckey at Monash University in Melbourne to provide a
  better user experience for type errors in Haskell. The key is that it
  doesn't just make fancier type errors! It uses aspects of a graphical user
  interface to provide a selection of different type errors. After all, if you
  say `not 'x'`, the `not` might be wrong, and the `'x'` might be wrong:
  Chameleon lets you choose which to focus on and provides appropriate type
  errors. The authors want to expand to more kinds of errors and more IDEs.
  Sounds like a very cool project!

**Richard**

- Attended Edsko de Vries's [talk on quadratic behavior within
  GHC](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/8/Avoiding-quadratic-GHC-core-code-size), with two
  primary examples: records with lots of fields and type-level lists. Records
  with lots of fields generate quadratic amounts of code because each
  record-selector must do a case-match on the record constructor, which binds
  a variable for each field. So each selector has size proportional to _n_
  (the # of fields), and there are _n_ selectors. Quadratic behavior. Urgh.
  Type-level lists (example: in heterogeneous lists) have a different problem:
  they repeat the types in the tail at every cons constructor. Quadratic
  behavior. Urgh. Edsko has a library that helps eliminate the bad behavior by
  putting a type-safe interface over internal untyped operations.

  There was some nice discussion after the talk about how to avoid the
  type-level list problem. Two possibilities: there is a paper Scrap Your Type
  Applications to fix this -- at the cost of considerable complication in
  Core. Or, we could use `let` to bind types and thus create sharing
  (eliminating the quadratic behavior). This `let` idea seems quite promising
  to me. I have posted [a
  ticket](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20264) to the GHC bug
  tracker to track this idea.

  To avoid the quadratic behavior around records is, in some ways, easier. We
  just have to modify Core's `case` expression not to require a listing of all
  fields bound by a constructor. This is a change to Core, though, and so we
  must tread carefully, as Haskell's type safety rests on the type safety of
  Core.

**Noon** &mdash; [Integrating Agda with SMT
Solvers](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/TyDe-2021/9/Integrating-Agda-with-SMT-LIB-An-incomplete-list-of-pits-I-fell-in) by Wen Kokke

- Based on refinement types for neural networks.
- Wanted to use SMT solvers.
- Real numbers vs. Floating point.
- Very fun quiz about what laws floating-point numbers might follow.
- Very nice discussion about integrating SMT solvers and languages such as Agda.
- Got me excited to keep trying to learn Agda!

**Richard**

- [HIW Keynote by Marten
  Agren](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/14/Haskell-reinterpreted-large-scale-real-world-experience-with-the-Mu-compiler-in-Fin) about Standard Chartered's compiler for Mu, a
  reinterpretation of Haskell. You can find (most of) the [talk on
  YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARBiEAKApTM). Standard Chartered
  has over 5 million lines of Mu code, a strong statement of the usefulness of
  pure, functional, strongly typed programming. They use Mu, not Haskell, for
  better interop with C++ and Excel. Interestingly, recursion is disabled by
  default.

**Noon** &mdash; Speed Networking (again)

- Gave up after being unable to find a match (despite there being several people in the networking; I think it's a quirk of the platform.)

**Richard**

- I gave my own [talk on generalization in
  GHC](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/4/Generalization-is-hard-but-somebody-s-got-to-do-it). Should be viewable [on
  YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARBiEAKApTM).

**Richard**

- Sam Derbyshire (my intern at Tweag) gave a [talk on the type-checker
  plugin](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/6/A-new-interface-for-GHC-typechecker-plugins-and-type-family-rewriting)
  work he has been doing during the summer.

**Noon** &mdash; FHPNC Table

- I joined the table and heard discussions about intermediate representations and MLIR; learned.
  that apparently some people are thinking of walking UP the MLIR stack to do different kinds
  of compiling (rather than the normal direction: down).

**Richard**

- Matth&iacute;as P&aacute;ll Gissurarson gave a very well-produced [talk on a
  type-checker plugin that makes Haskell into a dynamically typed
  language(!)](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/5/The-Dynamic-Haskell-Plugin-for-GHC).
  I'm not sure exactly where this will get used, but it's interesting to see
  how easy this is to do, and opens up new directions in gradual types
  research.

**Richard**

- Simon PJ's and Ben Gamari's ["State of GHC"
  talk](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/1/GHC-Status-update) was a hit, as always. There
  is lots and lots and lots of innovation in Haskell and GHC in the last year
  -- and the community is getting broader, with more contributors.

**Noon** &mdash; Missed some sessions because of a bug on the ICFP 2021 page.

**Noon** &mdash; [Testing Haskell with
Mocks](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/9/Testing-Haskell-with-Mocks) by Chris Smith

- Introduces the [HMock library](https://github.com/cdsmith/HMock).
- Naively googling this library yields some relaxing imagery.
- Surprised by the complexity of building this library.

**Richard**

- Chris Smith's talk on HMock -- a library supporting testing class interfaces
  by mocking up their behavior -- was interesting. He described a little
  language of _expectations_ that was compositional and can be used to
  describe the expected results of tests. I love how Haskellers do this all
  the time: express their APIs in terms of little languages; these languages
  are frequently compositional and provide the elemental building blocks for
  arbitrarily complex solutions.

**Richard**

- Tweag intern [Jeff Young gave a talk](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/11/Adventures-in-GHC-compile-times) summarizing the current state of play of
  his work on `IntMap`s and the `Unique`s in GHC. These `IntMap`s are used
  through GHC to track environments, and we have a hunch that cleverer
  representations of either the mapping structure or of `Unique`s themselves
  will improve compile times.

**Richard**

- Faustin Date [presented work on
  GSOL](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2021-papers/17/Lightning-Talk-GSOL-A-Confluence-Checker-for-Haskell-Rewrite-Rules), a tool to check for the confluence of
  Haskell rewrite rules using second-order logic. He found several potential
  sources of non-confluence in the rewrite rules in `Control.Arrow`, but also
  observed that the rules don't fire in practice. I chatted with him
  afterwards about the possibility of applying his idea to type family
  equations. GHC requires that type family equations are confluent but does so
  by somewhat brutally limiting their expressiveness. If we had a tool like
  GSOL, we could perhaps prove the confluence of type family equations in a
  different way and allow much more liberal rules in these equations. (Indeed,
  some of this might make Sam's work on plugins much less needed!)

**Noon** &mdash; [Introduction to Mechanized
Metatheory](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/PLMW-ICFP-2021/5/Introduction-to-Mechanized-Metatheory) by Brigitte Pientka

- Enjoyed this presentation about what is required when proving things about type systems.

**Noon** &mdash; [Emotional Machines](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/PLMW-ICFP-2021/6/Emotional-Machines) by Aaron Turon

- I had intended to go to PLTea but I ended up skipping that to watch this talk.
- I really enjoyed this talk; a bit surprisingly (when I read the description I wasn't certain I'd like it.)
- I really resonated with a lot of the topics that were brought up; and it gave me a lot to think about.

**Noon**

- That's where I ended the day. Overall it was quite a lot of talks. I'm glad I
  ended where I did, on something a bit relaxing. As usual, in a conference like
  this, I would vote for more breaks :D (and, if at all possible, given the
  online nature of this conference, if conference snacks could be delivered
  to all attendee's houses; I was missing free chocolate muffins and other
  tidbits to help me focus for so long!)

**Richard**

- To end the day, I had volunteered to serve as a mentor to PLMW (Programming
  Language Mentoring Workshop) attendees. I sat with a few other old hands
  with several newcomers to the field, discussing the shape of the PL field
  and brainstorming about directions and research ideas. I've done this before
  at PLMW, and it's always rejuvenating to hear new ideas and to help young
  researchers take their early steps.
