---
title: Nix 2.4 and 2.5
description: "Overview of the new features in Nix 2.4 and 2.5"
author: Eelco Dolstra
tags: [nix]
---

A couple of weeks ago [Nix 2.4 was
released](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/nix-2-4-released/15822). This
was the first release in more than two years. More than 195
individuals contributed to this release. Since Tweag is the biggest
contributor to the Nix project, I'd like to highlight some of the
features that Tweag has worked on.

## Flakes

Flakes are a new format to package Nix-based projects in a more
discoverable, composable, consistent and reproducible way. A flake is
just a repository or tarball containing a file named `flake.nix` that
specifies dependencies on other flakes and returns any Nix assets such
as packages, Nixpkgs overlays, NixOS modules or CI tests.

You can read more about flakes in the following blog posts:

- [Nix Flakes, Part 1: An introduction and tutorial](/blog/2020-05-25-flakes/)
- [Nix Flakes, Part 2: Evaluation caching](/blog/2020-06-25-eval-cache/)
- [Nix Flakes, Part 3: Managing NixOS systems](/blog/2020-07-31-nixos-flakes/)

The development of flakes was sponsored by Target Corporation and
Tweag.

## Content-addressed store

Nix's store can now be _content-addressed_, meaning that the hash
component of a store path is the hash of the path’s
contents. Previously Nix could only build _input-addressed_ store
paths, where the hash is computed from the derivation dependency
graph. Content-addressing allows deduplication, early cutoff in build
systems, and unprivileged closure copying.

The content-addressed store (CAS) is described in detail in [RFC
0062](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/62). It is still marked as
experimental, and [your input is
welcome](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/content-addressed-nix-call-for-testers/12881). You
can read more about CAS in these blog posts:

- [Towards a content-addressed model for Nix](/blog/2020-09-10-nix-cas/)
- [Self-references in a content-addressed Nix](/blog/2020-11-18-nix-cas-self-references/)
- [Derivation outputs in a content-addressed world](/blog/2021-02-17-derivation-outputs-and-output-paths/)
- [Implementing a content-addressed Nix](/blog/2021-12-02-nix-cas-4/)

CAS was developed by Tweag and Obsidian Systems, who were supported by
an IPFS Grant.

## UX improvements

The Nix command line interface (CLI) - commands such as `nix-env` and
`nix-build` - is pretty old and doesn't provide a very good user
experience. A couple of years ago we started working on a new CLI: a
single `nix` command to replace the `nix-*` commands that aims to be
more modern, consistent, discoverable and pleasant to use.

However, work on the new CLI had stalled somewhat because we didn't
have a discoverable packaging mechanism for Nix projects. Thanks to
flakes, we now do! As a result, in Nix 2.4, the `nix` command has seen
a lot of work and is now almost at feature parity with the old CLI. It
is centered around flakes; for example, a command like

```console
> nix run nixpkgs#hello
```

runs the hello application from the `nixpkgs` flake.

Most of the work on the new CLI was done by Tweag. We organized a Nix
UX team to review the state of the Nix user experience and [plan
improvements](https://github.com/orgs/NixOS/projects/10). A major
result of the UX team is a set of [CLI guidelines for the Nix
project](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/contributing/cli-guideline.html).
More UX improvements are coming up, including [an interactive progress
indicator](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/4296).

## Experimental features and release schedule

The previous Nix release (2.3) was in September 2019. Having a 2-year
gap between releases is something we want to avoid in the future,
since it's bad for both contributors and users that there is an
unbounded amount of time before a new feature shows up in a stable
release. The thing that has historically caused long gaps between Nix
releases is new experimental features landing in master that we
weren't quite sure about, and doing a new release meant having to
support these features indefinitely. However, Nix 2.4 introduces a
mechanism to mark features as experimental, requiring them to be
enabled explicitly on the command line or in the `nix.conf`
configuration file. Thanks to this, we can merge experimental features
in a way that still allows them to be changed or removed, while still
getting feedback from adventurous users.

Therefore, starting with Nix 2.4, we have switched to a 6-weekly
release schedule, meaning that we do a new release every 6 weeks. In
fact, [Nix 2.5.0 was already
released](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/nix-2-5-0-released/16589) a
few days ago!

## Non-blocking garbage collector

A very old annoyance with large Nix stores (such as CI systems) is
that garbage collection can take a long time, and during that time,
you couldn't start new builds. Instead you would get the infamous
message

```console
waiting for the big garbage collector lock...
```

Nix 2.5 has a new garbage collector that makes this a thing of the
past: the collector no longer prevents new builds from proceeding. The
development of the new collector was sponsored by
[Flox](https://www.floxdev.com).
