---
title: "Daily ICFP: Day 2"
author: Noon van der Silk, Arnaud Spiwack, Richard Eisenberg
tags: [icfp, haskell]
description: "Notes from the third day of ICFP"
---

# Daily ICFP

Several Tweagers all agreed to gather notes here about our
[ICFP](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/) (International Conference on Functional
Programming) experiences. We plan to publish these notes every evening.

## Day 2 - Tuesday

These notes follow Noon, Arnaud, and Richard through their day at ICFP,
roughly in order.

_Richard_ -- Watched the video for [**Symbolic and Automatic Differentiation
of
Languages**](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/17/Symbolic-and-Automatic-Differentiation-of-Languages),
by [Conal Elliott](https://conal.net). Conal's papers and talks are always
very insightful -- because they are always very simple. Conal has a
remarkable knack for taking problems that seem complex and reducing them to
their essence -- often, a simple compositional language. This work fits very
much in this vein, describing how we can derive parsers for a language
straight from its definition. The talk is gentle and mind-blowing all at the
same time.

_Noon_ -- [Higher-Order Probabilistic Adversarial Computations](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/32/Higher-Order-Probabilistic-Adversarial-Computations-Categorical-Semantics-and-Progra)

- Wondering if this is related to Adversarial Machine Learning.
- I think maybe; but it seems to be focused on categorising types of adversaries via type theory?
- It got quite technical for me quite quickly, but it's at least interesting to see a totally different take on this concept!

_Noon_ -- [How to Evaluate Blame for Gradual Types](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/7/How-to-Evaluate-Blame-for-Gradual-Types)

- Interested in this because I was curious about Gradual Types.
- "The Rational Programmer" - Seems cute/interesting; but also maybe a bit fraught because I think comparing the idea to the usage in economics is a mistake, as I believe it's widely considered to be one of the biggest mistakes in economics to assume rational agents!

_Noon_ -- [Symbolic and Automatic Differentiation of Languages](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/17/Symbolic-and-Automatic-Differentiation-of-Languages)

- Always relaxing to listen to Conal talk.
- I learned that the derivatives Conal talks about initially are these: [Brzozowski derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brzozowski_derivative)
- He then relates this to differential calculus!
- He then describes automatic and symbolic differentiation in this setting, and using this, builds language derivatives.
- The conclusion is that these two things have the same structure with different interpretations. Very cool.

_Richard_ -- I attended both Q&A sessions for my own paper, [An Existential
Crisis Resolved: Type Inference for First-Class Existential
Types](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/3/An-Existential-Crisis-Resolved-Type-Inference-for-First-Class-Existential-Types).
The first session went for 30 minutes, and the second session went for an
hour. This is a wonderful aspect of the online format: we have as much time as
we want to discuss a paper. There was considerable interest in an
implementation. A few other tidbits:

- The approach to existential types in the paper requires including
  _expressions_ in _types_. In order to compute type equality, then, we must
  define what expressions are equal to one another. A simple starting point
  for an expression equivalence relation is to use syntactic equality. Thus,
  `1 + 1` would equal `1 + 1`, but it wouldn't equal `2`. We can get cleverer
  over time. However, there is immediately a problem: GHC might optimize an
  expression. For example, it might change `let x = 5 in 10` to be just `10`
  (`x` was unused). But these expressions are not considered equal in types,
  so the optimization has the possibility of destroying the well-typedness of
  an expression. The solution is likely that we will have to have Core
  coercions (a coercion is essentially a little expression that says that two
  certain types are equal) that witness the correctness of optimization
  passes.

- Rust has a feature called impl traits (I think) that are essentially
  existentials. They seem strictly less powerful than what we've proposed in
  this paper, but I need to learn more about what Rust does.

_Noon_ -- [How to design co-programs](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/37/How-to-design-co-programs-JFP-Presentation-)

- Where do programs come from? Programs come from data structure.
- Mostly we talk about _input_ data structure; but should also talk about _output_ data structure!
- If you use this idea, you get a different algorithm for the sorting example.
- Overall I like the idea; I feel like there's probably more fruit to be gained from it.

_Noon_ -- PLTea

- Chat 1 - Very nice chat hearing about bidirectional programs.
- Chat 2 - Had a nice chat about CLaSH and formal verification.

_Noon_ -- SIGPLAN CARES

- Very nice chat about feeling included/excluded at a conference.
- Was very well moderated by Simon Peyton-Jones; left me feeling very hopeful.

_Noon_ -- [Leibniz equality is isomorphic to Martin-Löf identity](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/40/Leibniz-equality-is-isomorphic-to-Martin-L-f-identity-parametrically-JFP-Presentati)

- Looked interesting; didn't follow it all.
- My main conclusion: I need to learn more Agda.

_Noon_ -- PLTea #2

- Less good; conversations were a bit dominated by one or two people.

_Noon_ -- [Building PL-Powered Systems for Humans](https://icfp21.sigplan.org/details/icfp-2021-papers/42/Building-PL-Powered-Systems-for-Humans)

- Describing interesting UIs and programming synthesis in evaluating MOOC programming tasks.
- Nice discussion around how to let the users control the search space.
- Interesting paper to look into: [Assuage](https://priyan.info/files/assuage_uist2021.pdf).
- Interesting keynote idea to interview another researcher during your talk!
- Mostly enjoyed the interview, but sometimes got a bit lost when there wasn't any text/graphics to ground the conversation.

_Noon_ -- Dinner

- Got a nice intro to the 'Granule' programming language from Dominic Orchard and Jack Hughes.
- Learned that there is such a thing as types indexed by continuous variables!

_Richard_ -- Enjoyed the trivia night, quickly becoming a SIGPLAN conference
tradition, hosted by José Calderón and Paulette Koronkevich. We formed a team
rather randomly at one of the conference tables and then proceeded to **win**.
It turns out that recognizing a small detail of a Hieronymus Bosch painting
can come in handy!

(Richard attended less of ICFP than usual today, due to the need to execute
travel plans that had been delayed by Hurricane/Tropical Storm Henri over the
weekend. More action tomorrow and future days!)
